# A Methodology to Analyze Presidential Election Votes by Constituencies: Dimensionality Reduction and Modeling

Victor Eduardo Lachos Olivares <sup>1</sup> and Jorge Luis Bazán Guzmán<sup>2</sup>

<sup>1</sup>Department of Applied Mathematics and Statistics, University of São Paulo, São Carlos, Brazil

<sup>2</sup>Department of Applied Mathematics and Statistics, University of São Paulo, São Carlos, Brazil

Corresponding Authors: Eduardo Lachos Olivares: velo28@usp.br Jorge L. Bazán: jlbazan@icmc.usp.br

## Previous installations

- To run the scripts, you will need the STAN software through the RStan package. For installation details, refer to:
Guo, J., Gabry, J., Goodrich, B., & Weber, S. (2020). Package ‘rstan’. URL https://cran. r―project.
link: [https://www.jstatsoft.org/index.php/jss/article/view/v012i03/33](https://pj.freefaculty.org/guides/crmda_workshops/sem/Archive/sem-4/literature/manuals/rstan.pdf)

## File description:

Follow files and folders
- Application.elec.R: Contains all required packages for the bounded regression model. The two main datasets used in the model are:

Election results by constituency.

Human development indicators (or other covariates) used to analyze the factors derived from principal component analysis (PCA).

- Aux.functions.elec.R: Includes auxiliary R functions for data transformations and PCA metrics (e.g., scores, loadings, cumulative variance), along with Bayesian criteria for model selection.

- Stan Models: Four bounded regression models were developed:

Null model

Mean model

Precision model

Full model (including all parameters of the Beta regression)
- Data_votes: Folder contains datasets of votes for elections Peru (2021), Brazil (2022), and Chile (2021).
- Data_HDI: Folder contains datasets of Human development indicators for Peru, Brazil and Chile.
- Results: Folders contain the estimated results for elections Peru (2021), Brazil (2022), and Chile (2021) generated by Application.elec.R, stored in .txt format.
  
## Instructions for Running R and RStan Codes
1. Open Application.elec.R in R and execute the script, ensuring the two main datasets (election votes and Human Development Index) are available.
   
2. The default settings for the Stan model, given the small dataset size, are:

iter = 5000
chains = 1
seed = 1234

Weak priors for the parameters:
  alpha ~ normal(0, 100); 
  epsilon ~ normal(0, 100);
  delta~ normal(0, 100);
  beta ~ normal(0, 100);  // Prior for regression coefficients



